Add Developer Experience docs: debugging, startup performance, and hot reload (#464)
microsoft/aspire.dev: src/frontend/src/content/docs/fundamentals/debug-aspire-apps.mdx

## How Aspire debugging works

When an IDE starts an Aspire application in debug mode, the AppHost launches the configured resources and sets up the Aspire dashboard. Debug support is annotation-driven: each resource that declares support supplies a launch configuration, and the IDE starts a debugger only for the launch configuration types it understands. Built-in integrations use this mechanism for .NET projects, Python, JavaScript and TypeScript, Go, .NET MAUI, and Azure Functions resources.

You can:

- Attach the debugger to multiple **supported** resources
- Debug a **specific** resource while running others normally
- Use your IDE's standard debugging features (breakpoints, watch windows, call stacks) across all attached resources

<Aside type="note">
Debug support isn't determined by whether a resource was added with `AddProject<T>()`. An integration must declare debug launch support, and the active IDE or extension must understand that launch configuration type. Generic containers and executable resources don't gain debugger support automatically; use their runtime- or IDE-specific tooling unless their integration declares it.
</Aside>

## Debug in Visual Studio

> Visual Studio offers tight Aspire integration. When you open an Aspire solution in Visual Studio and press **F5** (or select **Debug** > **Start Debugging**), Visual Studio automatically starts the AppHost and attaches the debugger to supported .NET project resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visual Studio offers tight Aspire integration. When you open an Aspire solution in Visual Studio and press <Kbd windows='F5' /> (or select **Debug** > **Start Debugging**), Visual Studio automatically starts the AppHost and attaches the debugger to supported .NET project resources.
```

---

> title: Debug Aspire apps

Reviewer 2: This `og:title` is below the repos 30-character minimum, so `seo-lengths.vitest.test.ts` will fail. `startup-performance.mdx` has the same issue; could we add valid `seoTitle` values to both?

---

import { Aside, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import { Kbd } from 'starlight-kbd/components';
import LearnMore from '@components/LearnMore.astro';

Debugging distributed applications with Aspire is straightforward because Aspire orchestrates all your services and containers in a single session. You can attach a debugger to any or all of your services simultaneously, debug selectively, or run some services without a debugger while debugging others. This guide explains how to debug Aspire apps across different IDEs and environments.

## How Aspire debugging works

When you start an Aspire application in debug mode, the AppHost launches all configured resources and sets up the Aspire dashboard. Each service project is started with the debugger attached if requested. You can:

- Attach the debugger to **all** services at once
- Debug only **specific** services while running others normally
- Use your IDE's standard debugging features (breakpoints, watch windows, call stacks) across all attached services

<Aside type="note">

> Aspire's debugging support works for .NET project resources. Containers and executable resources can be debugged using their own tooling, but the Aspire AppHost does not attach a debugger to them automatically.

Reviewer 2: Debug support is not limited to `AddProject<T>()`. `WithDebugSupport` also covers Python, JavaScript/TypeScript, Go, MAUI, and Azure Functions resources. Could we describe this as annotation-driven debug support instead of making `AddProject<T>()` the boundary?

<Steps>

1. Open your Aspire solution (`.sln` or `.slnx`) in Visual Studio.
1. Set the AppHost project as the startup project if it isn't already.
1. Press <Kbd windows='F5' /> or select **Debug** > **Start Debugging**.

</Steps>

Visual Studio builds all projects, starts the AppHost, and attaches the debugger to every .NET service project in your solution.

### Debug a specific service

To debug only specific services while running others normally, use the **Attach to Process** approach:

<Steps>

1. Start the Aspire solution without debugging from the command line:

    ```bash title="Aspire CLI — Run without debugger"
    aspire run
    ```

1. In Visual Studio, select **Debug** > **Attach to Process** (<Kbd windows='Ctrl+Alt+P' />).
1. Find and select the specific service process you want to debug, then select **Attach**.

</Steps>

This lets you choose exactly which service to debug without attaching to all services at once.

### Set breakpoints across services

Visual Studio allows you to set breakpoints in any service project. When a breakpoint is hit, Visual Studio pauses that service's execution, while all other services continue to run normally.

<LearnMore>

> For more information, see [Launch profiles](/fundamentals/launch-profiles/).

Reviewer 2: `/fundamentals/launch-profiles/` does not exist (it is also linked later in this page and in `startup-performance.mdx`). Could we use `/integrations/dotnet/launch-profiles/`?

1. Press the green **Start Debugging** button or press **F5**.

</Steps>

VS Code attaches the debugger to all .NET service projects in your Aspire solution and opens the Aspire dashboard in your browser.

### Debug a specific project

To target a specific project:

```json title="JSON — .vscode/launch.json"
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      "type": "aspire",
      "request": "launch",
      "name": "Aspire: Launch MyAppHost",
      "program": "${workspaceFolder}/src/MyApp.AppHost/MyApp.AppHost.csproj"
    }
  ]
}
```

Point the `program` field to the specific AppHost project file you want to use.

## Debug in JetBrains Rider

JetBrains Rider supports Aspire projects natively from Rider 2024.1. You can run and debug Aspire solutions directly from the IDE.

### Start debugging

<Steps>

1. Open your Aspire solution in Rider.
1. In the **Run/Debug Configurations** dropdown, select the AppHost project configuration.
1. Press <Kbd windows='Shift+F9' /> or select **Run** > **Debug** to start debugging.

</Steps>

Rider launches the AppHost, starts all configured services, and attaches the debugger to .NET service projects.

### Troubleshooting Rider

> - **Missing run configuration**: If no Aspire run configuration appears, ensure you have a supported Rider version (2024.1 or later) and that the [.NET Aspire plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/23162) is installed and enabled.

Reviewer 2: This Rider plugin URL returns 404, and Rider now bundles the current plugin. Could we update the URL and installation guidance?

</LearnMore>

## Debug in Neovim or other terminal editors

You can debug services in Aspire from any editor that supports the Debug Adapter Protocol (DAP), including Neovim with plugins like `nvim-dap`, by attaching to running service processes.

### Attach to a running process

<Steps>

1. Start the Aspire solution from the CLI without a debug session:

    ```bash title="Aspire CLI — Start Aspire"
    aspire run
    ```

1. Find the process ID of the service you want to debug:

    ```bash title="Bash — Find service process"
    ps aux | grep MyService
    ```

1. In your editor, use the attach-to-process feature to attach to that PID. For Neovim with `nvim-dap`, configure a `coreclr` adapter using the `attach` request type and the discovered PID.

</Steps>

### Start a VS Code debug session from the CLI

If you're using VS Code or an editor that supports the VS Code debug adapter protocol, you can start a debug session from the terminal:

<Steps>

1. Run the Aspire app with the debug session flag:

>     ```bash title="Aspire CLI — Start with debug session"

Reviewer 2: `--start-debug-session` is an extension backchannel: it starts a debug session only when Aspire is running in an Aspire terminal, and it does not print a URI for an arbitrary editor. Could we remove this workflow or scope it specifically to the VS Code extension terminal?

### Option 1: Run Aspire on Linux

The most straightforward approach is to develop and debug directly on Linux (or WSL2 on Windows).

<Steps>

1. Install the prerequisites on your Linux machine or WSL2 environment. For more information, see [Prerequisites](/get-started/prerequisites/).
1. Run your Aspire solution normally using `aspire run` or your IDE.

</Steps>

### Option 2: Use Docker containers with remote debugging

For projects that run as Linux containers, you can configure remote debugging:

<Steps>

1. Add a development-time Dockerfile for your Linux service that publishes in Debug configuration and includes the .NET debugger tools:

    ```dockerfile title="Dockerfile — Linux service with debugger"
    FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:10.0 AS build
    WORKDIR /src
    COPY . .
    # Publish in Debug configuration so that .pdb files are included
    RUN dotnet publish -c Debug -o /app/publish

    FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:10.0 AS debug
    WORKDIR /app
    COPY --from=build /app/publish .

>     EXPOSE 4024

Reviewer 2: `vsdbg` is a stdio debugger, not a server listening on port 4024, and `targetPort` here still maps to a random host port. This attach workflow will not work. Could we use a supported Docker/SSH `pipeTransport` or Visual Studio container-attach flow instead?

    # Install vsdbg (the .NET debugger)

>     RUN apt-get update \

Reviewer 2: The `mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet` image does not include `curl` or `unzip`, so this `getvsdbg.sh` step fails before the debugger is installed. Could we install the prerequisites first?
